.TH SHIT 1 "2026-07-17" "shit" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
shit \- a fast POSIX and bash compatible shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shit
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ script
.RI [ argument ...]]
.br
.B shit
.B \-c
.I command
.RI [ argument ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shit
is a fast POSIX and bash compatible shell. An interactive prompt is run when
standard input is a terminal and no script is given. A script file named on the
command line is run, or a command string is run when it is given with
.BR \-c .
.PP
A command path ending in a directory separator fails with status 126 when the
normalized target is not a directory.
.PP
shit is designed to work without absolutely no config whatsoever. shit's Linux
binary is static. shit also works without coreutils, using it's own shitbox
utilities instead. all so you can copy shit to any machine and enjoy the shell.
.SH MOODS
The shell runs under one of four moods. The mood sets how strict the run is.
The default
.B shit
mood is the strict bash superset, and a questionable construct is warned on
through the analysis stage. The
.B bash
mood runs the bash extensions with the analysis stage off. The
.B sh
mood behaves like dash. The
.B bash-posix
mood is bash reached through the posix option, so a terminal that re-execs
with
.B \-\-posix
to inject its integration finds the bash identity and the bash rc rather than
the dash-like sh mood. The nounset, pipefail, and failglob strictness, the
analysis stage, and the parser features are all driven by the mood.
.PP
A binary named or symlinked to
.BR sh ", " dash ", or " bash
is matched to the corresponding mood, and diagnostics are turned off. The mood
is changed at runtime by the
.B set --mood
builtin, and a
.B set --mood
inside the rc sticks for the session. An explicit
.BR "set -u" ", " "set -o pipefail" ", or " "set -o failglob"
is the script's own ask and survives a later mood switch.
.BR "set -o posix"
mirrors
.BR "\-\-posix" ,
selecting the
.B bash-posix
mood, and
.B "set +o posix"
steps down to the
.B bash
mood only when already in the
.B bash-posix
or
.B sh
mood, otherwise it is a no-op.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Mood and startup
.TP
.BR \-M ", " \-\-mood =\fINAME\fR
The runtime mood is selected, one of
.BR shit ", " bash ", " sh ", or " bash-posix .
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-init\-moods =\fILIST\fR
The startup files for each listed mood are sourced, in order. The list is given
comma separated or by repeating the flag. The
.B shit
mood reads /etc/shitrc and ~/.shitrc, the
.B bash
and
.B bash-posix
moods read the bash rc and its completion, and the
.B sh
mood reads the file named by ENV. The list defaults to the value of
.BR \-\-mood .
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-mimicry
A script whose shebang names a shell shit can emulate is run in-process in the
matching mood. The in-process run keeps the diagnostics and saves the launch of
the real shell.
.TP
.B \-\-dumb
The flags
.BR "\-\-mood sh \-T \-\-no\-diagnostics"
are applied together.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-privileged
BASH_ENV is not sourced. Interactive rc files and login profiles are still
sourced when the real and effective ids are equal. Every startup file is
skipped in the setuid or setgid case. Without this flag, elevated ids are
dropped before execution. The privileged state is exposed through
.BR $- ,
.BR SHELLOPTS ,
and
.BR "set -o privileged" .
.TP
.B \-\-clean
A clean shell is started. No startup file is read in any mood, and PATH is set
to a minimal default.
.TP
.BR \-\-init\-file " " \fIFILE\fR ", " \-\-rcfile " " \fIFILE\fR
FILE is sourced as the interactive rc. The two spellings are aliases, and the
last occurrence selects the file. The shit mood sources it in place of
/etc/shitrc and ~/.shitrc. A non-login bash mood sources it in place of
~/.bashrc. A leading tilde is expanded.
.TP
.B \-\-norc
The interactive bash rc and a file named by
.B \-\-rcfile
or
.B \-\-init\-file
are skipped. Login profiles and noninteractive BASH_ENV startup are unchanged.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-restricted
Restricted mode is requested. Startup files run before its restrictions become
active. A basename of
.B rbash
requests the same mode and selects the bash mood.
.TP
.B \-\-posix
The bash-posix mood is selected, the same as
.BR "\-\-mood bash-posix" .
A terminal that re-execs the shell with
.B \-\-posix
to inject its integration through the bash rc is honored.
.SS Restricted shell
A restricted shell rejects directory changes and changes to SHELL, PATH,
HISTFILE, ENV, and BASH_ENV. A command name may not contain a directory
separator. A source path, a history path, and a hash \-p path may not contain a
directory separator.
.PP
The output redirections >, >|, <>, >>, &>, &>>, and output redirection through
>& are rejected. Numeric descriptor duplication remains available. The exec
builtin, command \-p, and enable \-f or \-d are rejected. Restricted mode
cannot be disabled with set +r. Changes to the restricted_shell shopt value
are accepted without effect.
.PP
The restrictions become active after startup files finish. A sourced script
keeps them. A shell script found through PATH and executed as a command runs
without them, matching bash.
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.B \-W[W...]
The analysis stage is kept. A single
.B \-W
demotes a lenient analysis error to a warning, and the run proceeds. An
unresolved command and a variable read before it is assigned are the lenient
errors. A strict analysis error, such as a malformed glob pattern, stays fatal
under a single
.BR \-W .
A repeated
.BR \-W ,
written
.BR \-WW ,
demotes every analysis error to a warning, the strict ones included, and the run
proceeds in every case. The runtime warnings are reported in the strict default
mood under
.B \-W
and in every mood under
.BR \-WW .
The set builtin names level one
.B force-warnings
and level two
.BR force-diagnostics .
Without the flag the strict default mood reports an analysis error as fatal and
stops the run before any command executes.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-diagnostics
The analysis stage is skipped. No warning or pre-run diagnostic is reported.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-init\-diagnostics
Diagnostics and warnings are suppressed only while the startup files source,
then restored for the prompt. The flag pairs with
.BR \-W .
.TP
.B \-\-list\-diagnostics
The shellcheck-style checks the analysis stage reports are listed, then the
shell exits.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-no\-completion
Interactive tab completion and ghost-text are disabled.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-syntax\-highlighting
The syntax coloring and the ghost suggestion are disabled, and tab completion
still works.
.TP
.B \-\-enable\-shitbox
The bundled shitbox utility names such as
.BR ls ", " mkdir ", and " cp
resolve directly as commands, the same as
.BR "set \-o shitbox" .
.SS POSIX
.TP
.BR \-c " \fICOMMAND\fR"
Commands are read from the string COMMAND.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Interactive mode is forced.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stdin
Commands are read from standard input.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-error\-exit
The shell exits on the first failing command.
The exemption for a non-final operand of
.B &&
or
.BR || ,
and for a command negated by
.BR ! ,
is inherited by a called function body. An otherwise unguarded function call
and an otherwise unguarded final operand keep error exit enabled.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-no\-glob
Pathname expansion is disabled.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-no\-unset
An unset variable is treated as an error.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-no\-clobber
An existing file is not overwritten through a plain redirection.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-exec
The script is parsed without being run.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-one\-command
A single command is read and run, then the shell exits.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-xtrace
Each command is printed after expansion.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Each line is printed as it is read.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-export\-all
Every later assignment is marked for the environment.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-login
The shell runs as a login shell.
.SS Information
.TP
.B \-\-help
The help message is displayed, then the shell exits.
.TP
.B \-\-version
The version and notices are displayed, then the shell exits.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-short\-version
The short version is displayed, then the shell exits.
.SS Debugging
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-show\-ast
The syntax tree is printed before each command runs.
.TP
.BR \-E ", " \-\-show\-exit\-code
The exit code is printed after each command.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-show\-lexed\-words
The escape bitmap is printed after each parsed command.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-optimizer\-state
The analysis prepass decisions are traced, and a located line is printed to
standard error for every node the analysis stage eliminated, then a final
summary is printed.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-stats
Per-command statistics are printed.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-memory
A memory report is printed at exit.
.TP
.BI \-X " LEVEL" "\fR, \fB\-\-debug\-logging=" LEVEL
Internal logging is enabled at LEVEL, one of
.BR info ", " debug ", or " all .
The flag is compiled in only in a debug build.
.TP
.BI \-\-debug\-logging\-file= FILE
The debug log is appended to FILE in place of standard error.
.SH BASH SYNTAX
The bash language beyond POSIX sh is accepted in every mood but sh. The forms
below are the additions, with the traps a compatible reimplementation has to get
right.
.SS Arrays
.TP
.B Indexed
An array is built with a=(x y z), an element is set with a[2]=z, and more are
appended with a+=(w). ${a[i]} reads an element through an arithmetic subscript,
${a[@]} and ${a[*]} list the elements, ${#a[@]} counts them, and ${!a[@]} lists
the indices. A negative index counts from the end. A gap left by a[5]=q makes a
sparse array whose ${!a[@]} skips the holes.
.TP
.B Associative
An associative array is declared with declare \-A m, then set with m[key]=v and
read with ${m[key]}. ${!m[@]} lists the keys, and unset 'm[key]' removes one
entry.
.TP
.B "The quoting trap"
"${a[@]}" keeps each element a separate field, while "${a[*]}" joins them on the
first byte of IFS. An inner ${a[*]} inside ${x[@]+"${a[*]}"} still joins on IFS.
A read of ${a[@]} under set \-u raises an error when a is unset.
.SS Conditionals and arithmetic
.TP
.B "[[ ... ]]"
The test command takes ==, !=, the numeric \-eq family, the file tests including
\-nt and \-ot, && and ||, and =~ for a POSIX regex that fills BASH_REMATCH. The
right side of == is a glob when it is bare and a literal when it is quoted, and
=~ splits the same way. && and || short\-circuit. A dead branch that holds a
malformed regex is never compiled.
.TP
.B "(( ... )) and $(( ... ))"
Arithmetic takes the C operators, ++ and \-\-, **, the ternary, the comma, the
assignment operators, a 0x hexadecimal, a 0 octal, a 0b binary, and a based
literal such as 16#ff. The 0b binary prefix is an extension over bash. Bash
writes the same value as 2#. A name is re\-evaluated as an expression, and
a[b[c]] resolves c, then b, then a. An empty (( )) exits 1, and an empty $(( ))
yields its value.
.SS Parameter expansion
.TP
.B Substring
${v:offset:length} cuts a substring. A negative offset is written with a leading
space, ${v: \-3}. Without the space ${v:\-3} is the default\-value form. A
negative length stops that many characters from the end.
.TP
.B Replacement
${v/pat/rep} replaces the first match and ${v//pat/rep} every match, anchored by
/# at the front and /% at the end. An & in the replacement stands for the
matched text, and \\& is a literal &.
.TP
.B "Case and transform"
${v^^} and ${v,,} change the case of every character, and ${v^} and ${v,} change
the first, each with an optional pattern. The ${v@Q}, @E, @A, @P, and @a
transforms quote, expand, render, and report the value.
.TP
.B Indirection
${!ref} reads the variable that ref names. ${!pre*} and ${!pre@} list the names
that start with pre.
.SS Word generation
.TP
.B "Brace expansion"
{a,b,c} lists words, {1..10} and {a..z} count a range, {1..10..2} adds a step,
and {001..10} pads the width. Braces nest and multiply. A lone {a} stays
literal.
.TP
.B Quoting
$'...' reads the C escapes \\n, \\t, \\xHH, and \\OOO. $"..." marks a string
for translation, and it is the plain double quote when no catalog is present.
.TP
.B "Redirection and substitution"
&> and &>> send both output streams to a file, and |& pipes both. <(cmd) and
>(cmd) are process substitutions on a /dev/fd path, and <<< is a here\-string
that appends one newline. A {var}> or {var}< redirection allocates a free
descriptor numbered ten or above, performs the redirection on it, and binds the
number to the variable, and {var}>&\- closes the descriptor the variable names.
.TP
.B Globbing
shopt \-s extglob turns on ?(), *(), +(), @(), and !(), and shopt \-s globstar
turns on **. dotglob, nullglob, and failglob change how a leading dot, a
non\-match, and a failed match are treated. In the default mood a non\-matching
glob and a glob in command position are fatal, and a compatibility mood warns.
.SS Builtins and pitfalls
.TP
.B Attributes
declare, local, typeset, and readonly take \-a, \-A, \-i, \-r, and \-x. printf
takes \-v to assign its result, and mapfile and readarray with \-t read the
lines of the input into an array.
.TP
.B "Pipeline status"
Under set \-o pipefail the pipeline reports the rightmost failing stage, and the
default mood turns pipefail on. PIPESTATUS holds every stage's status in either
case.
.TP
.B "Word splitting"
An unquoted $@ or $* splits on IFS. "$@" keeps the parameters apart, and "$*"
joins them on the first byte of IFS. A run of a non\-whitespace IFS character
makes an empty field, and a run of whitespace collapses.
.TP
.B read
read \-r keeps a backslash literal. A plain read treats a trailing backslash as
a line continuation.
.SH LINE EDITING
The interactive line editor starts in emacs mode. A vi-style modal editor is
selected by
.B set \-o vi
and the emacs default is restored by
.BR "set \-o emacs" .
Ghost text uses prefix matches from completion and history. Tab also offers
smart-case and subsequence matches.
Quoted, escaped, variable, and tilde directory prefixes remain in their typed
form when a later unquoted slash or basename is completed.
In vi mode each line begins in insert mode. Escape enters command mode. Command
mode provides the motions, the operators with counts, the named registers, the
change repeat, and a visual selection. The visual selection is charwise from
.B v
and whole lines from
.BR V .
The last edit is undone by
.B u
in command mode and by
.B Ctrl\-_
in either mode. The undone edit is redone by
.BR Ctrl\-^ ,
or by
.B Ctrl\-R
in command mode. The incremental history search is opened by
.B Ctrl\-R
in insert mode and by the
.B /
key in command mode. Enter accepts the highlighted match into the line and
leaves the search without running it. Ctrl\-G cancels the search, and the line
is restored to its state from before the search began. The colon key opens an
ex command. The commands
.BR q ", " q! ", " wq ", " wq! ", " x ", and " quit
exit the shell. The cursor shape tracks the submode, a bar in insert, a block in
command, and an underline in visual or while an operator waits for its motion.
In command mode the arrow keys step between the buffer rows and do not recall
history. The insert-mode arrows still recall it. With an operator pending, Up or
Down acts on the current line together with the line above or below, the
linewise dk and dj.
.PP
A block selection is entered with
.B Ctrl\-V
in command mode, a column rectangle across several lines. The keys
.BR d " and " x
delete the rectangle, and
.BR I ", " c ", or " C
insert the typed text at the left column of every selected line. Several lines
are indented at once. The arrows and
.B h j k l
move within the rectangle.
.PP
A multi-cursor edit is entered with
.B Ctrl\-V
in emacs mode and selects nothing. A cursor sits at the same column on every
spanned line, and
.BR Up " or " Down
grows the span by one line. A typed character is inserted at every cursor at
once, and Backspace erases at every cursor. The edit is left with
.BR Ctrl\-G .
.SH RESCUE
When a flag in SHIT_FLAGS or in the argument list fails to parse and standard
input is a terminal, the login shell will enter rescue.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SHIT_FLAGS
The default flags are applied before the command line. A flag on the command
line still wins. The recommended value is
.BR "\-W \-I \-\-init\-moods=shit,bash" .
.TP
.B SHIT_HISTORY
The command history file, ~/.shit_history by default. The history builtin lists
this file and reads, writes, and clears it through the \fB-r\fP, \fB-w\fP, and
\fB-c\fP flags.
.TP
.B SHIT_DIRECTORY_HISTORY
The frecency store the z builtin ranks, ~/.shit_directory_history by default.
.TP
.B SHIT_CALC_HISTORY
The interactive calc REPL history file, ~/.shit_calc_history by default.
.TP
.B ENV
The startup file sourced in sh mood.
.TP
.B BASH_ENV
The startup file sourced by a noninteractive bash mood before its command,
standard input, or script runs. Parameter expansion, command substitution,
arithmetic expansion, and a leading tilde are expanded in its value. PATH is
not searched. Interactive, bash-posix, clean, privileged, and rescue sessions
do not source it.
.TP
.B PATH
The colon\-separated command search path. The \-\-clean flag resets it to a
minimal default.
.TP
.B HOME
The home directory. It is read by tilde expansion and by the default rc and
history paths.
.TP
.B PWD
The current working directory, maintained by cd and z.
.TP
.B OLDPWD
The previous working directory, set by cd and z. cd \- returns to it.
.TP
.B SHELL
The path to the shell, set from the environment, or to the running binary when
it is unset.
.TP
.B SHLVL
The shell nesting depth, read from the environment, incremented, and set back. A
child shell counts one deeper.
.TP
.B CDPATH
The colon\-separated search path cd consults for a relative operand. When an
explicit directory is missing, cd suggests a close sibling directory when one
exists.
.TP
.B IFS
The field separator for word splitting and the join of $*, a space, a tab, and a
newline by default.
.TP
.B "COLUMNS, LINES"
The terminal width and height, set for an interactive shell from the terminal
size.
.TP
.B PROMPT_COMMAND
A command run before each interactive prompt is drawn.
.TP
.B TERM
The terminal type, read to decide whether color is supported.
.TP
.B MANPATH
The manual search path, read by completion to offer a subcommand and an option
from the pages.
.TP
.B PIPESTATUS
The indexed array of the exit status of each stage of the last pipeline.
.TP
.B REPLY
The line read by read when no name is given, and the line the select loop
records.
.TP
.B "OPTIND, OPTARG"
The option index and the option argument getopts maintains as it walks the
positional parameters.
.TP
.B TIMEFORMAT
The format the time builtin prints its report in.
.TP
.B PS1
The primary prompt template, rendered before each interactive command. A default
template is supplied when it is unset.
.TP
.B PS0
The prompt rendered and printed after a command line is read and before it runs,
empty by default.
.TP
.B PS2
The continuation prompt default, "> ", carried for compatibility.
.TP
.B PS3
The prompt the select loop prints, "#? " by default.
.TP
.B PS4
The prefix the set \-x trace prints, "+ " by default. The first character is
repeated once per enclosing subshell.
.TP
.B BASH_XTRACEFD
The descriptor the set \-x trace is written to. The trace stays on standard
error when the variable is unset or holds no valid descriptor.
.TP
.B SHIT
The path this shell was invoked through, the shit identity mate of BASH. The
value is present in every mood. BASH is seeded only under the bash identity.
.TP
.B SHIT_VERSION
The shell version, in the major.minor.patch\-extra form such as 0.0.8\-beta.
.TP
.B SHIT_COMMIT
The commit the binary was built from, <no git> when none was recorded.
.TP
.B SHIT_BUILD_MODE
The build mode of the binary, one of dbg, rel, or cov.
.TP
.B SHIT_OS
The host the binary was built on, the distribution and kernel identification.
.TP
.B SHIT_GIT_BRANCH
The branch around the working directory, read from .git without forking git.
The short commit hash is read on a detached head, and an empty value outside a
repository. A stored assignment wins.
.TP
.B SHIT_IDENTITY
The lowercase SHA-256 identity of the running executable. The value is computed
on its first read or before a child program starts, then cached, exported, and
marked read-only. An inherited value is discarded.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Color is turned off in the prompt and the diagnostics when the variable is set.
.TP
.B SHIT_ANSI_*
A color escape is provided under each of these names. A prompt template carries
an attribute without an escape byte. The recognized colors are BLACK,
RED, GREEN, YELLOW, BLUE, MAGENTA, CYAN, and WHITE, each also with a BRIGHT_
prefixed high\-intensity form, along with the attributes BOLD, DIM, and RESET.
The names resolve in every mood. A recognized name reads back empty when color
is off. NO_COLOR and a redirected prompt turn the escapes off, and the prompt
stays plain. A stored assignment to one of the names wins over the
provided escape.
.TP
.B "RANDOM, SRANDOM, SECONDS, LINENO, EPOCHSECONDS, EPOCHREALTIME"
These resolve on each read. RANDOM and SRANDOM give a fresh random value,
SECONDS counts the seconds since the shell started, LINENO gives the line of the
current command, and EPOCHSECONDS and EPOCHREALTIME give the wall clock time in
seconds. They resolve in every mood but sh.
.TP
.B "BASHPID, PPID, UID, EUID, GROUPS, HOSTNAME, HOSTTYPE, MACHTYPE, OSTYPE"
These describe the running process and the host, resolved on each read. BASHPID
is the process id, PPID is the parent, UID and EUID are the real and the
effective user, GROUPS is the real group, and HOSTNAME, HOSTTYPE, MACHTYPE, and
OSTYPE name the host and the platform. They resolve in every mood but sh.
.TP
.B "SHELLOPTS, BASH_SUBSHELL, BASH_ARGV0, BASH_EXECUTION_STRING, BASH_MONOSECONDS"
These report shell state on each read. SHELLOPTS is a colon-separated list of
the enabled set \-o options and reflects later set changes. BASH_SUBSHELL counts
the subshell depth, BASH_ARGV0 is the shell name,
BASH_EXECUTION_STRING is the argument of \-c, and BASH_MONOSECONDS is a
monotonic millisecond counter. They resolve in every mood but sh.
.TP
.B "FUNCNAME, BASH_SOURCE, BASH_LINENO, BASH_COMMAND"
These trace the running code. FUNCNAME names the function in progress,
BASH_SOURCE is the file it was read from, BASH_LINENO is the line of the call,
and BASH_COMMAND is the command being executed. The array forms give the whole
call stack. They resolve in every mood but sh.
.TP
.B BASH_REMATCH
The indexed array of the groups the last [[ ... =~ ... ]] match captured.
.TP
.B "BASH, BASH_VERSION, BASH_VERSINFO"
A bash identity is advertised under these names so a bash rc detects it. They
are seeded only in the bash mood. BASH is the path to the shell, BASH_VERSION is
the version string, and BASH_VERSINFO is its indexed components.
.TP
.B "COMP_WORDS, COMP_CWORD, COMP_LINE, COMP_POINT, COMP_WORDBREAKS, COMPREPLY"
A programmable completion function reads these and writes COMPREPLY. COMP_WORDS
holds the words on the line, COMP_CWORD is the index of the word under the
cursor, COMP_LINE is the whole line, COMP_POINT is the cursor offset, and
COMP_WORDBREAKS is the characters that split a word.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/shitrc
The system rc the shit mood sources.
.TP
.I ~/.shitrc
The user rc the shit mood sources.
.TP
.I ~/.shit_history
The default command history file.
.TP
.I ~/.shit_directory_history
The default frecency store for the z builtin.
.TP
.I ~/.shit_calc_history
The default history file for the interactive calc REPL.
.SH SHITBOX
The
.B shitbox
builtin hosts a set of small bundled coreutilities. A system with only a
compiler can run a configure and a make under shit.
.B "shitbox ls"
runs the bundled ls. A name with no matching utility is an error, since the
shitbox builtin only runs the bundled utilities and never routes to a shell
builtin. With the
.B \-\-enable\-shitbox
flag or
.B "set \-o shitbox"
the utility names resolve directly as commands without the prefix. A utility
is used when PATH holds no program of that name. A binary whose name is a
utility, such as a symlink named ls, acts as that utility, and the utility's own
flags reach its parser. A symlinked utility prints the shit version on
\-\-version. Every utility supports \-\-help. The binary behind the name is
visible, and its help names the shit shell.
.B "shitbox \-\-assimilate DIR"
installs one such symlink per utility into DIR. In the default shit mood a bare
utility name also falls back to the bundled utility when PATH holds no binary of
that name. A missing system coreutil is filled in. A PATH binary still takes
precedence in every mood.
.TP
.B basename
Prints the final path component and supports an optional suffix operand.
.TP
.B calc
Evaluates arithmetic arguments or reads expressions with \-i or \-p.
.TP
.B cat
Concatenates files or standard input and supports line numbering with \-n.
.TP
.B cp
Copies files or directory trees and supports \-r, \-R, and \-v.
.TP
.B dirname
Prints the directory portion of one path.
.TP
.B du
Totals path sizes without following symlinks and supports \-s and \-h.
.TP
.B env
Applies temporary assignments, runs a command, or prints the environment.
.TP
.B find
Walks sorted trees and supports \-name, \-type, \-maxdepth, \-mindepth, and
\-print.
.TP
.B flock
Runs a command under a directory lock and supports \-\-transaction\-held\-lock.
.TP
.B grep
Prints regular-expression matches and supports \-i and \-v.
.TP
.B head
Prints the first ten lines by default and supports \-n and \-c counts.
.TP
.B killall
Signals processes by exact name and supports \-s, \-\-signal, \-l, and \-\-list.
.TP
.B ln
Creates symbolic links and supports \-s and \-f.
.TP
.B ls
Lists sorted entries and supports \-a, \-A, \-1, \-l, and \-h.
.TP
.B make
Runs compact make rules and supports \-f, \-\-file, \-C, and \-\-directory
while accepting unused \-B and \-k and ignoring \-j.
.TP
.B mkdir
Creates directories and supports \-p and an octal \-m mode.
.TP
.B mv
Renames sources and supports \-f and \-v.
.TP
.B nproc
Prints available logical processors and supports \-\-all and \-\-ignore=COUNT.
.TP
.B pkill
Signals processes whose names match a pattern and supports \-s, \-\-signal,
\-l, and \-\-list.
.TP
.B ps
Lists processes and supports \-a, \-u, \-x, and the accepted \-w flag.
.TP
.B realpath
Prints the canonical absolute form of each path.
.TP
.B rm
Removes paths and supports \-r, \-R, \-f, and \-\-dry\-run while refusing
root, dot, and dot-dot.
.TP
.B rmdir
Removes empty directories.
.TP
.B seq
Prints signed integer sequences with a nonzero step.
.TP
.B sleep
Pauses for summed durations with optional s, m, h, or d suffixes.
.TP
.B sort
Sorts input lines in byte order and supports \-r.
.TP
.B tail
Prints the last ten lines by default and supports \-n and \-c counts.
.TP
.B tee
Copies standard input to output files and supports append mode with \-a.
.TP
.B timeout
Supervises a command for a suffixed duration and supports \-s, \-\-signal,
\-k, \-\-kill\-after, \-p, and \-\-preserve\-status.
.TP
.B touch
Updates file times and supports \-c to avoid creating missing files.
.TP
.B tr
Translates input bytes with ranges and character classes and supports deletion
with \-d.
.TP
.B uniq
Collapses adjacent equal lines and supports run counts with \-c.
.TP
.B unlink
Removes one non-directory path.
.TP
.B wc
Counts lines, words, and bytes and supports \-l, \-w, and \-c.
.TP
.B which
Resolves builtins, PATH programs, and shitbox utilities and supports \-a,
\-\-all, \-q, and \-\-quiet.
.TP
.B whoami
Prints the current user name.
.TP
.B yes
Repeats its joined operands or y until output closes.
.SH SHIT BUILTINS
These builtins are unique to shit and have no counterpart in bash or dash.
.TP
.B assimilate TARGET
The running shell is copied through scp to an SSH target and installed as
.B shit
in one writable and searchable directory in the remote PATH. A directory whose
path contains sbin is skipped. /usr/local/bin and $HOME/.local/bin are preferred
when they occur in PATH. Every requested link and the binary are installed in
one directory, and a directory is skipped when an existing path would be
clobbered. The
.B --link-mood=MOOD
option requests a relative link named bash, dash, sh, or shit. The option can be
repeated, and each value can contain comma-separated moods. The
.BR -x " or " --trace
option prints remote installation progress. The
.B --ssh-command=COMMAND
and
.B --scp-command=COMMAND
options replace ssh and scp. COMMAND is split into arguments at literal spaces.
The
candidate is validated before an atomic rename. An existing file or symlink is
renamed into the transaction lock and restored when a handled validation or
install step fails. Temporary upload, candidate, and backup paths are removed
after success and handled failure. The candidate SHA-256 identity must match the
local executable. Concurrent installs serialize through a remote keeper
process. The keeper holds the transaction lock until the transaction child
exits, including after its launcher exits. A later install recovers published
and orphaned journals before it starts.
The local shell can run on any supported platform. The remote host must provide
a POSIX-compatible SSH login shell that can launch the transferred executable.
The transferred shell performs the transaction with its bundled shitbox
utilities. A failed transfer cannot alter the installed target. A partial upload
can remain when the transferred executable cannot start. A remote SIGKILL,
power loss, or storage failure can leave a complete target or recoverable hidden
staging files because the remote cleanup process cannot run after it stops.
.TP
.B bench
Each command is run repeatedly as a measured child, and a summary of the wall
time, the peak resident set, and the available perf counters is printed as mean,
standard deviation, and range. With more than one command, each later command is
printed against the first as a relative speed. Each sample forks a fresh shit
process that runs the command with
.BR -c ,
so the command is evaluated by shit rather than the system shell. Sampling stops
as soon as a sample returns a non-zero exit code, unless
.B --ignore-exit-code
is passed. The command output is suppressed unless
.B --show-output
is passed.
.B --no-shell
forks the command directly, without wrapping it in a shell.
.B --runs
sets the exact sample count and
.B --duration
sets the sampling budget in milliseconds.
.TP
.B z
The shell changes to a frequently visited directory ranked by a frecency store
at ~/.shit_directory_history. The store weights each directory by its visit
count and how recently it was seen. The operands join into one query, and a
directory
is matched by case insensitive substring.
.SH BASH BUILTIN EXTENSIONS
These builtins follow bash semantics rather than being unique to shit. They are
present so a bash script that probes or calls them keeps sourcing.
.TP
.B set [OPTION] [ARG ...]
A minus enables a shell option and a plus disables it. set \-o NAME and set +o
NAME select the same state by long name. With no name, set \-o prints the
current states, and set +o prints reusable commands. set \-\-options prints
every option with its state and description. set \-E controls errtrace, set \-P
makes cd resolve symbolic links, set \-T controls functrace, and set \-B
controls brace expansion. Runtime set \-n stops later commands in the current
parsed list. Runtime set \-r enables restricted mode and cannot disable it
again with set +r.
Changes made in a command substitution are restored when the substitution ends.
SHELLOPTS, $\-, [[ \-o NAME ]], and completion report the shared state.
.TP
.B enable [\-a] [\-d] [\-n] [\-f FILE] [\-s] [NAME ...]
Every builtin remains enabled. The \-d, \-n, \-f, and \-s compatibility flags
are accepted without effect, and \-a lists every builtin.
.TP
.B hash [\-r] [\-p PATH] [NAME ...]
Resolved command locations are remembered or listed. The \-r flag clears the
cache. The \-p flag records PATH as the location of each NAME.
.TP
.B bind
A no-op stub. The flags and the operands are accepted without effect, and the
builtin returns zero. The interactive editor is the vendored toiletline editor,
and key binding is not wired through this builtin.
.TP
.B caller
Without an operand the builtin prints nothing and returns one at the top level
and zero inside a function or a sourced file. With an operand the operand is a
frame index, and the builtin prints the line number and the source file of that
frame. A non-numeric operand is a located error.
.TP
.B help
Without a pattern every builtin name is printed one per line. With a pattern the
pattern is a builtin name, and the builtin help is rendered the same way the
target's
.B \-\-help
flag renders it. A name that is not a builtin is a located error. The
.B \-d
short description flag and the
.B \-m
manpage flag are accepted without effect.
.TP
.B logout
Exits a login shell after the EXIT trap runs. The optional operand is the exit
status. In a non-login shell the builtin prints a not-login-shell message and
returns one, since
.B exit
is the non-login counterpart.
.TP
.B suspend
The shell is stopped with SIGSTOP and resumes on SIGCONT. A login shell is
refused unless
.B \-f
is passed to force the suspension.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The shell exits with the status of the last command it ran. A usage error such
as an unknown flag in a non-interactive run exits with status 2.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR dash (1),
.BR sh (1),
.BR fish (1),
.BR busybox (1)
